-: Information may be segmented
or broken up into smaller chunks
for transmission across a physical medium.
The maximum transmission unit, or MTU
of an outgoing interface depends on the physical medium.
As an example, the MTU of fast ethernet is 1,500 bytes.
However, TCP can theoretically support 65,495 bytes
in a single packet.
When that is sent to the lower layers of the OSI model,
that will need to be broken up into fragments
for transmission across the physical medium,
which, for example, only supports 1,500 bytes.
Data is therefore broken up into smaller chunks,
and the receiver, using TCP, will need
to put those fragments back together again.
The maximum segment size, or MSS,
is the largest amount of data in bytes
that TCP is willing to send in a single segment.
For best performance, the MSS should be set small enough
to avoid IP fragmentation,
which can lead to excessive retransmissions
if there's packet loss.
TCP supports something called maximum segment size,
and path MTU discovery,
or path maximum transmission unit discovery,
where the sender and the receiver
can automatically determine what the maximum
transmission unit is on a path between them,
and TCP will only put enough data into a single packet
that fits that MTU,
thus avoiding fragmentation of packets,
and thus avoiding the overhead associated with fragmentation
and the putting together of the IP fragments.
Path MTU discovery is optional in IPv4,
but has now become mandatory in IPv6
because of the efficiencies that it brings
to the TCP transmission,
and the fact that IPv6 does not support fragmentation
on routers along the path between two hosts.
UDP does not support this,
and requires high layer protocols
to sort out the fragments.
Flow control.
TCP uses end-to-end flow control
to avoid having the sender send data too quickly
for the receiver to receive it and process it reliably.
If the sender transmits data faster
than the receiver can handle,
the receiver will drop the data,
which will require retransmission.
Retransmissions will waste time and network resources,
which is why most flow control mechanisms
try to maximize the transfer rate
while minimizing the requirements to retransmit.
You may, as an example, have a PC with a powerful CPU
sending data to a handheld PDA,
which can only process data at a much lower rate.
The PDA should therefore regulate the data flow
so it's not overwhelmed.
In TCP, basic flow control is implemented
by acknowledgements from the receiver
in receipt of data transmitted.
TCP uses something called a sliding window
to control the flow of data.
Windowing will allow a receiving computer
to advertise how much data it's able to receive
before transmitting an acknowledgement
to the sending computer.
In each TCP segment, the receiver will specify
in the receive window field the amount
of additional receive data in bytes
that it is willing to buffer for the connection.
The sending host can only send up to that amount of data
before it must wait for an acknowledgement
and window size update from the receiving host.
UDP does not implement flow control,
and in a VoIP environment, as an example, which uses UDP,
even though there's no physical connection
between two handsets involved in a telephone call,
the call will stay up, and the sender
will merrily continue sending huge amounts of data,
even though the receiver cannot process the received data.
UDP relies on high layer protocols
to implement flow control.
Once again, TCP is connection orientated,
and UDP is connectionless.
TCP will establish the session connection,
and maintain the connection during the entire transmission.
Once a transmission is complete, the session is terminated.
UDP does not set up sessions,
and will just send the data in the hope
that the receiver will receive it.
Once again, TCP implements reliability
where every segment transmitted is acknowledged,
and if the segment went missing, it is retransmitted.
UDP does not implement reliability,
and once again, relies on high layer protocols
to implement any reliability if required.
In certain cases, such as Voice over IP,
or video transmitted over an IP infrastructure,
reliability is not required.
There is no point retransmitting lost voice packets.
So a quick comparison between UDP and TCP,
or a reliable protocol and a best effort,
or unreliable protocol.
TCP, once again, is connection orientated.
No data is transmitted before a session is established.
A three-way handshake takes place
before any data is transmitted.
There are acknowledgements of data received,
and sequence numbers to track transmission of data.
UDP, on the other hand, is connectionless,
and does not track data,
and does not ensure delivery of data.
TCP uses sequence numbers, UDP does not.
Applications that use TCP include HTTP, email, and FTP.
Applications that use UDP include voice streaming
applications like Voice over IP,
and video streaming applications.
Because of the nature of VoIP or video,
there is no reason to retransmit.
In a VoIP environment, the talker will be required
to repeat what they said if the listener
was unable to decipher what was communicated.
If you've ever used Skype, at times,
it may sound like the person speaking is underwater,
or they sound more like a machine
than the person you know speaking,
but you may still be able to understand what they've said,
and thus, even though data went missing,
the conversation can continue,
or if it gets bad enough, you would ask the speaker
to repeat what they said.
In a video streaming environment, you may notice
that part of the image is not refreshed properly,
but you're still able to follow
what's happening in the video.
Because of the time-sensitive nature of voice and video,
it is pointless retransmitting data,
and thus, TCP is not used in these environments,
UDP is used.
So UDP is a transport layer protocol.
It resides at layer four in the OSI model.
It provides applications with access to the network layer,
or layer three, without the overhead
of reliability mechanisms
As discussed, this is ideal for Voice over IP
or video applications.
It's connectionless, where a one-way datagram
is sent to a destination without advanced notification
to the destination device.
There is no communication before transmission of data.
The data just arrives at the receiver,
and it's expected that the receiver handle that data.
UDP is capable of providing very limited error checking.
The UDP datagram does include an optional checksum value,
which the receiving device can use
to test the integrity of the data.
The UDP header also includes a destination port number,
and if that datagram is directed to an inactive port
on the receiving device,
a return message can be transmitted
to indicate that that port is unreachable.
I'm gonna discuss port numbers in more detail in a moment.
It's a very important concept to understand.
UDP provides best effort delivery.
There is no guarantee that data is delivered.
Packets may be misdirected, duplicated,
or lost on their way to the destination.
There is no guarantee of receipt.
Higher layer protocols will need implement reliability
if required.
There are also no data recovery features in UDP.
Once again, high layer protocols will need to recover
from lost or corrupted packets.
TFTP, as an example, has a built-in mechanism
to handle data loss,
and TFTP, using UDP, has its own built-in sequencing
and retransmission mechanisms,
as it cannot rely on UDP to implement reliability.
The UDP header is very simple.
It has a 16-bit source port number,
a 16-bit port destination number,
so these specify the port number used by the source
and a port number used by the destination.
It has a 16-bit UDP length field
that specifies the length in bytes of the entire datagram,
in other words, the header and the data.
The minimum length for UDP datagram is eight bytes,
because that's the length of the header.
Theoretically, the maximum size is 65,535 bytes,
but IPv4 will impose a maximum limit of 65,507 bytes.
Optionally, A UDP checksum can be used for error checking.
This is optional in IPv4, but is not optional in IPv6.